Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Sten van Hule. He's
a clinical psychologist professor at Ghent University and psychoanalyst
in private practice. And today we're going to talk
about his book Why Psychosis Is Not So Crazy
A Roadmap to Hope and Recovery for Families and
caregivers. So Dr. Van Hula, welcome to the show.
It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, um, I'm, I'm glad to be here, Ricardo,
yeah, and thanks for the invitation anyways.
Yeah, of course. So, um, let me start by
asking you this and also to introduce the topic
to people who might not be familiar with the
subject, and I would imagine most people would not
be. Uh, HOW do you approach psycho psychosis, particularly
from your standpoint as a psychoanalyst and Uh, I
mean, how is it usually approached among, uh, clinical
psychologists?
Yeah, so the mainstream opinion or the mainstream thinking
about psychosis is especially thinking of it in terms
of a severe mental disorder that is characterized by
a couple of specific kind of symptoms, like people
having hallucinations, meaning, They see or hear things that
are not there or they feel things onto their
body that are not there in reality, so that's
the first characteristic. Then the second is delusions, meaning
that people have opinions about the world, about themselves,
about their relationships that actually do not hold true,
um, often in the direction of suspicion, um, or,
um, being elected to be very special, um. So
that, that's usually the case um in, in a
delusion and then there is often in the context
of psychosis, behavioral changes, meaning that people can become
very chaotic in what they do or very manic
or very inhibited um or do weird things. This
is usually how psychosis is defined. Uh, MEANING as
a, as a kind of a, a severe problem
where people, so to speak, go away from common
reality, uh, which is often why it is experienced
as disturbing both by a patient and by the
people around them, like by the, by family, but
also more broadly by society, um, we, we tend
to have problems when people. Have specific opinions or
behave in strange ways, there is something of an
anxiety that, that arises. Um, AND so therefore, it,
it, it, it's, it makes a problem for, for
people, psychosis. Um, SO that's mainly the general idea
about it. Um, OF course there's all kinds of
specific criteria that psychiatrists and clinical psychologists use to
diagnose it, uh, um,
and, and what is your view on those criteria
and on how, uh, most, or at least, uh,
mainstream clinical psychologists tend to approach psychosis?
Yeah, so, well, basically, um, as a psychoanalyst, I
see it as follows. Um, THE way I described
it provides us with the viewpoint of an outsider.
This is how it looks for people, um, but
as a psychoanalyst, I'm, I'm, I'm interested in the
question, yeah, but what is it that brings it
about such an experience? Uh, THIS is not something,
uh, random. This is not just noise in the
mind. This is not. Not just a brain entering
in a most chaotic state. For me it's the
question of a human being, a human being that
obviously has been challenged to such a degree that
their common way of making sense of, of themselves
and of the world does not work anymore, um,
and so therefore their way of functioning, their mind
is switching. To, to different ways of, of making
sense of things, um, and so as a psychoanalyst,
that, that's my, my main question. Of course, there
is this experience of reality that changes, but there's
a base to a certain internal logic. It's, it's
people being challenged to severe, in a, in a,
in a very severe degree that creates such um
a mindset, so to speak. And that challenge can
be, is, is very complex and is very diverse.
Um, IT might reflect something of people's social situation
that has become very difficult or their relational situation
that has become very difficult. It might witness to
very severe things that have happened in people's lives,
or of course it might also. Uh, REVEAL something
of an, of an internal dynamic. So, um, I
don't know that on beforehand when as a psychoanalyst
when I start working with people, but the key
idea here is that it's not random, um, it's,
it's psychotic experiences are responses to, to triggers, to,
to situations that have been overwhelming for a person
and as a psychoanalyst, I tend to stress this.
And um that, that's of course a bit different
compared to mainstream psychiatric practice where the idea is
more about, OK, these are weird experiences and we
have to contain them, which is usually why people
start thinking about medications in the first instance for
people with psychotic um. Experiences to, to just calm
it down, to kind of, to, to diminish the
symptoms, to diminish the crisis experience that people have.
And, and I'm not against medications, but for me
the crisis experience is revelatory of something of, of
how people live and how the challenges they are
confronted with, and as a psychoanalyst, I want to
value that component of the, of the psychotic experience.
But do you still approach psychosis as a mental
disease, um, and I mean, more broadly as a
psychoanalyst, what is your understanding of what mental disease
is?
Yeah, so. Here I start from Freud and Sigmund
Freud's opinion was that we actually all have psychopathological
traits. Huh, a normal person does not exist. We
all have our specific kinds of weirdness, huh, and
so I see it as a dimension, huh, as,
as a dimensional space in which you can have
like very mild experiences of weirdness, uh, and that's
what we usually call normal, but check normal people,
it's not that they know who they are, it's
not that they are always like very rational in
what they do. Um, NORMAL people still have like
all kinds of irrational thoughts. Um, THEY also suffer
from doubts and uncertainties. They have weird dreams. They,
they say stupid things to their partner, to their
children. So even if you are, so to speak,
normal, you have in Freudian perspective, you still are
wrestling in a certain sense with like situating yourself
in the world and in your, also with respect
to your inner world. Um, BUT here the idea
is that um we can. Move on that um
dimension to the direction when things become a problem,
when people start to experience these inner experiences or
these relations to other people as potentially a problem.
So when I doubt and I doubt a bit
too much, Then maybe my life is troubled because
I can't make decisions anymore or I, I start
feeling anxious or I start feeling depressed, so it's
when it moves, when it becomes more extreme, it
becomes a clinical problem and a clinical problem is
a problem for which you need help because you
can't cope with it anymore yourself. So for me
that's a clinical situation, that's, so to speak, a
disorder that, that is when the internal order. It's
disruptive to such an extent that you can't cope
with it on yourself anymore, huh, so that's my,
my broad idea of what what what is a
disorder or what is a clinical problem and, and
here we have to apply that continuum also to
the experience of psychosis, um. There's many people who
at a certain point of their lives have um
like experiences that are very difficult to explain to
other people, maybe some more paranormal experiences, um, or
some vague experiences of reality that is, that, that
is strange in a certain sense, but that does
not mean that it is a clinical problem, huh,
but it can evolve in such a way. That
it becomes a problem, that it becomes intolerable for
yourself, or that people in your, in your environment
like in your family start being worried about you
because in their opinion, you're doing weird things or
or having weird thoughts, so that's a point where
it might become clinical and clinical means that it's.
It implies uh um a severe degree of suffering,
uh, so for me that's, that's the criterion. If
something of an inner experience or an experience of
reality is so disturbing that it creates real suffering
for people, then it starts to be clinical and
then it becomes a problem where clinicians, uh, should
attend to, like, that's also the point where, for
example, a psychoanalyst could enter the scene. Uh, TO,
to try to speak with people about what they
experience and what is destabilizing them. So, for me,
it's not like a categorical distinction between or you
have a clinical problem or you don't. Um, OF
course, as human beings, we tend to categorize and
because that's what makes it a bit more easy
for us, but actually, I, I see it as
a continuum.
Mhm. So let me ask you this, and please
let me know if you think that this is
something worth considering when evaluating whether someone Um, I
mean, whether something that someone experiences should be classified
as a mental disorder or not. So, uh, do
you think that perhaps there would be instances, and
here I'm not exclusively referring to psychosis necessarily, it
can be any other sort of uh mental phenomenon.
I mean, do you think that there are at
least some instances where Uh, people might express distress,
but it is, it is not something that really
has to do with their mental condition, but it's
just because, uh, the, their behavior or perhaps some
of the ideas they express are not normative in
the society. So they, they are part of, I
mean, and they, and they suffer psychologically, not because
something is wrong with them, but just because they
think and behave in ways that are not considered
normative in their society.
Yeah, yeah, of course that's possible and that's what
we usually call stigma, stigmatization, um. And stigmatization happens
all the time in a society. It's a sociological
mechanism, so to speak, where you have like the
dominant ideas in a group, in a society, for
example, or in, in, in, yeah, of course be
in, in a smaller group where there is a
certain consensus about what is, what is common, what
is acceptable, and what is not. Um, AND what
typically happens is when in a group some people
start having opinions that are different than the common
opinion that people tend to like think about what
is wrong with that person, um, or what is
strange about that person. Uh, AND then you get
stigmatization where the one who is having different behaviors
or different ideas is seen as, as, as, as
weird, maybe also as dangerous, as unreliable, um, and
when these thoughts are being developed about people, this
is also exactly like a trigger for mental difficulties,
huh, so when you're being stigmatized because you're somewhat
different. This leads to a path that makes you
more vulnerable for, for mental health condition, uh like
for example, take homelessness, um, people can become homeless
because they have bad luck in life, but once
you're homeless. And you don't have a place to
live, there is a quite a chance that society
starts to think of you as being a very
weird person because you don't have money, you don't
have a house, so it is concluded that you
must be very strange and that you must be
like very difficult to deal with, that you must
be lazy, uh, because you don't have a job.
So there's
yeah, it usually comes attached to some sort of
a more. OR character failing, right,
and so then you have the stigmatization, but once
this kind of framing is imposed onto you, it
becomes very difficult to escape from it, so that's
already a burden for, for people that creates this
stress and it's exactly this kind of trap that
keeps um people awful in a negative cycle when
you have psychotic experiences, uh, for me, the psychotic
experience. Psychologically speaking, is often not that weird because
it's responding to something of an internal dynamic, to
something of an experience that people have, and often
this is it's very comprehensible why people have this
kind of experience, but if also from an outside
perspective at that very point stigma. IZATION starts, then
you can enter into a negative cycle where it
becomes very difficult for a person to escape from,
um, from, yeah, from that problem because you're continuously
confirmed in that problem rather than you experience that
you are being helped to find a way out
of it and that, that's often what, what makes
it more chronic psychotic experience, but it should not
be that. That way, uh, we can indeed organize
care in such a way that it becomes an
encounter with people where we start from an openness
to their experiences and think of it as, OK,
this is someone who is trying to make sense
of a very difficult life. Situation or a very
difficult moment in life, uh, on the one hand
and on the second hand, we can think of,
OK, but what is an environment that might have
a healing potential for people, huh, and it's when
you can create an environment where people are respected.
Where they are valued, where they're not just seen
as a problem, but just as human beings who
are, who, who maybe have psychotic experiences but, but
who have many other experiences, when you're treated as
fully human, this is a, a context that is
helping people to escape from or to find a
way out of this crisis, but when you don't
provide such a context, And rather start stigmatizing people,
for example, by declaring, declaring them very sick, very
ill, very chronically, never to be healed, uh, one
psychotic, always psychotic, when you start having this kind
of opinions, yeah, of course it, it becomes very
difficult for people to escape, and so it's, it's,
it's often us that create, that make it a
very difficult problem for people who have the, the
psychotic experience.
Uh, DO you think that even the diagnostic label
itself can sometimes, uh, induce, uh, distress, or, I,
I mean, or contribute to it being harder for
the person to really improve their mental condition because
I mean, if you get attached to this idea
that becomes part of sort of your identity. That
you are a psychotic person instead of, for example,
just someone who in certain circumstances experiences psychotic episodes
or psychotic reactions. I mean, couldn't that be problematic?
Yeah,
absolutely, and at that point it's very important to
attend to the language that we use when we
speak about mental health difficulties. Like for example, a
diagnosis like schizophrenia, which when you check it psychiatric
manual is one of the psychotic disorders, um, this
is a label. To which many ideas are already
connected before you have it, yeah, so, often the
idea of schizophrenia is connected to a deteriorating brain,
to having to take medications for the rest of
your life, uh, you will have difficulties in working
and getting relationships, um, you will probably be chaotic
and things like that. So there's a whole network
of of expectations that is being created and. So,
if we quickly give, or if mental health professionals
quickly use that label to try to make sense
of what a person is going through, this might
have a devastating effect and therefore, it's interesting to
see, of course, that there is a counter movement
within psychiatry who questions these labels and who wonders,
like, is it the best way to address things
and um at that level. I'm more uh inclined
to speak about um Psychotic, not as to not
use it as a noun, but to use it
as an adjective, meaning like you can have psychotic
episodes, you can have psychotic um experiences, you can
have a vulnerability to, to psychosis, and then we
more see it as a process like thing, um,
and not as a fixed state. And that's usually
one of the problems that we're all responsible for,
um, that we tend to, to think of it
as a state, as a fixed state and not
as something that is more process-like and for me
that's the only useful way of thinking of it
and what is kind of interesting is that when
we at the societal level, think about um Less
severe, so to speak, psychiatric disorders or psychiatric problems
like, for example, anxiety and depression, we we tend
to think of it as a process like we
might all have at a point in our lives
a depressive episode, uh, but we don't tend to
think of it like, OK, once depressed, always depressed,
no, it will be maybe a vulnerability in your
life, and when you have had an episode and
you enter. A difficult moment in your life later
on that you might react again with psycho with,
with depressive experiences, but we tend to think of
it more as a process. But when we switch
to psychosis where reality is experienced in a different
way, we tend to to hold on to that
categorical thinking and at that point, it is stigma
that we do, we do stigmatization and that's something,
of course. That is, that is not very fruitful,
and that me also as a psychoanalyst, I see,
OK, we at that point have to change something
in our mental health system because that mental health
system is still too strongly oriented towards the towards
categorical diagnosis.
So what do we know about uh how psychotic
episodes happen? I mean, what is it that triggers
psychotic episodes in people?
Um, WELL, of course that's a complex story. Um,
THERE is no one cause or one specific trigger
that is, is there in, in all cases, but
there is, uh, first of all, there is a
component of biological vulnerability that is there, but, um,
the thing is it, it has. Always been overestimated
that component, um, like for example, genetics do play
a role in our vulnerability for psychotic experiences, but
long it has been thought as if genetics would
explain like 50% of, of, of, of the chances
that you develop a psychotic episode or not, but
actually that's, it's much less. It's, it's, it's more
around 1012 to 15% of your vulnerability is a
biological component. That means that there's other components that
play an important role, and for example, what we
do know is there's quite some societal stressors that
make people more vulnerable to psychosis, like for example,
um, experiencing trauma as a, in your young age,
and they could both be abuse or misuse or,
or, or, yeah, being bullied as a, as a
child. Um, THAT, that's something that makes you vulnerable
or belonging to a minority group that is excluded
in society, that's what makes you vulnerable. So there's
a couple of social factors that play a role,
um, but also, and that's also what interests me
as a psychoanalyst the most. Um, AS human beings,
we are internally confronted with, uh, dilemmas for which
we don't have a definite answer, like, um, like,
for example, how to relate in relation to sexuality
and love, how to relate and as a parent
in relation to children or as a child in
relation to your parents, how to organize your life
in such a way that it becomes meaningful, that,
that the idea of dying is not devastating. These
are also like very specific human questions that do
return in the triggering of a psychotic episode, because
it's often at turning moments in life that people
start to have psychotic episodes, like it's, it's when,
for example, when people graduate from school and have
to switch to having a job, or when they
start a relationship, or where there's a relationship breakup,
or when they have a child. And they have
to be a father or a mother, or when
you had a job and you're fired, or you
have a job and you try to do it
so good, and you go in overdrive, or someone
who's very close to you and. Dies like a
parent or a loved one, these are all moments
in life that made, that trigger us, that, that
challenge us, and these are psychologically speaking, often the,
the, the tipping points, the triggers that, Yeah, that
provokes something of a psychotic experience and so for
me as a psychoanalyst, it's always very important to
not just look at the psychotic experience in the
sense like reality is being experienced in strange ways,
but always like, yeah, there is something that that
is being experienced, so the content of a psychotic
experience is often. Something of an elaboration already of
the trigger that people have been confronted with, um,
so for example, when people are being confronted with
death in their lives, uh, and that is very
difficult to them, there's quite a chance that there
will be a morbid character in their, in their,
in their psychotic experiences that it will be around
threatening about murdering, about dying, about being dead already.
Uh, SO that something of the thematics of the
delusion of the hallucinatory experience echoes something of the
dilemmas that people have been confronted with, huh? So
that's my idea as a psychoanalyst, and it's only
by attending very carefully to what people say about
what they experience that we can get in touch
with the triggers and the difficult aspects in their
lives that, that they have been struggling with.
So what do you think or what would you
say psychotic episodes express about uh the psyche of
a particular person in particular circumstances?
Well, for me it's um it expresses existential dilemmas.
Um, YEAH, uh, what to do as a human
being. So it's actually, it's an existential ethical foundation
of human being that is being triggered there. What
should I do to do good in life, to
do good, um, as a child in relation to
my parents, as a parent in relation to my
children, what should I do? And the thing is
that as a human being, we are not entirely
biologically programmed. We are programmed by biology, we do
have instincts at to a certain level, like we
don't have to consider very consciously how many times
we will breathe, uh, in, in, in a time
span of, of one minute. This happens automatically because
the body regulates itself, huh, but at the level
of our psychological functioning, we don't have. Instinctual regulation
for everything and that's the very point that psychoanalysis
calls the drive, uh, the, the dimension of the
drive and what is the drive? It means that
we are triggered by situations and our body reacts
in an effective way to situations, but it's not
that biology is guiding us in how to, how
to deal with these situations, and that's exactly at
that point we are there as a questioning human
being, as an existential. Creature who is, who is
knowledgeable about the fact that we are and that
we are there, but we wonder how we should
deal with situations and when we wonder how we
should deal with situations as human beings. We tend
to look at the answers that have been formulated
around us, the answers in our context by our
families, by our parents, by our societies, through the
books that we read, through the education that we
got, and we tend to relate to these ideas
in a dialectical way. Like, I agree with some
of the ideas and I disagree with other ideas,
and as a human being, I search my way.
Into these dilemmas and as long as I can
do that, I have something to hold on to,
but my idea about psychosis is that we as
human beings also have the potential, the, the, the,
the, the possibility of ending up with no answers
at all with, with the dilemma, yes, but with
finding no solutions anymore. With seeing no perspective anymore
and at that point that's for me the triggering
of a psychotic episode when we as speaking beings
who use words and narratives to make sense of
ourselves and of the world might end up in
a situation where there's no word that is organized
potentially organizing. Uh, REALITY anymore is, is, is available
and at that point, reality goes crazy for people
because it becomes inexplicable. It becomes no longer possible
to frame something of reality, and framing is something
that we always do with words. With ideas and
ideas are rooted in words, that's how I think
of it as, as, as a psychoanalyst, um, and
so therefore, also talking therapy is very useful in
working with people with psychotic experiences, the possibility because
it's a way of thinking how maybe words can
be used to digest something of that very difficult
experience.
Right, but, but I mean, it's one thing for
the narratives that we have at our disposal in
our socio-cultural context to not work for us anymore
in particular cases or in particular circumstances, but, uh,
I mean, is it possible or do you think
that it's possible that perhaps some of these, uh,
norms or some of these normative. Ideas that we
get from our society as to how we deal
with, for example, death, loss, romantic breakup, or, I
mean, even some of our more personal failings, like,
for example, failing in being a proper father, a
proper mother, or whatever your understanding of that is
in your, according to the society you live in.
I mean. Do you think that perhaps some of
these, let's say, expectations or norms of thinking could
induce or at least could aggravate uh psychotic episodes
because we are failing to conform to conform to
the expect the expectations put upon us by our
society.
Yeah, so at that point we will make within
Laconian psychoanalysis, meaning psychoanalysis in, in, in, in line
with the works of Jacques Lain, we make this
distinction between neurotic and psychotic struggling. HM, yeah, and
what is typical of neurotic struggling with like the
societal norms is that we are always in doubt.
Am I doing the good thing because people or
society might expect this. And this and that from
me, but, and, and then I struggle with do
I want to comply with it or not, uh,
and, and it results in internal conflict, uh, uh,
but we are always like in a continuous internal
dialogue with all the expectations around us, and that's
typical for neurotic experiencing. What is typical for psychotic
experiencing rather is that, um. At a certain point,
these narratives around me don't make sense anymore, that
it, it's, it's more the experience as if they,
um, they don't speak to me anymore. Um, I
know they are there, but yeah. They don't help
me, they don't inspire me anymore, and I rather
start to feel empty handed, as if I'm alone.
I'm the one who needs to solve the situation
because there's no idea, there's no one who can
really help me with this dilemma, so it's really
the experience of being really alone in the world
um that is often so typical of, of, of
people with psychotic experiences. And then you have to
see of course that when bad things happen in
people's lives, for example, imagine that you're being abused
as a child by your parent, huh? So here
you have something that you experience, uh, and societal
norms tell you that this cannot be the case
because a father or a mother is supposed to
take care of you, but you are in a
private situation where this is not happening, so it
becomes very difficult to make sense of that. Experience
that you're having given the referential framework that you
have and that's a point that might make people
more vulnerable because you are confronted with situations that
literally do not make sense, huh, and so that's
really triggering for a young mind to deal with
that, um, and so that's how I see why
trauma. Yeah, severe trauma is often indeed triggering to
psychosis.
Yeah, but then definitely the reference points we get
from our cultural context uh can play a role
in psychosis.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely, yeah, yeah, um, I don't what
we typically see then in psychosis is that often,
um, uh, when people develop so-called delusions or start
having hallucinations that they pick up elements from the
culture. Um, LIKE, for example, nowadays, many people will
have delusions that go in the direction of AI
as if they have the feeling that an AI
is taking control of their, over their brain. Um,
THAT thoughts are being put into their mind and
they don't think these thoughts themselves, but still the
thoughts are there, so it must be that it's
not my intelligence but an artificial intelligence that is
entering my mind, uh, so what we see in
psychotic experiences is that it echoes, that it goes
into, uh, an innovative dialogue, so to speak, with,
with, with the culture around us. And it's, for
example, now we see lots of experiences that pick
up something of, of, of, of information technology, but
that's also why in many psychotic experiences, God is
there and Jesus is there and Allah is there
and Muhammad is there, uh, and Buddha is there.
Why is that? It's because, of course, these are
the cultural references that we use. That we have
been using for ages to think about the dilemmas,
but then it's not so much as an idea
that I'm in a dialogue with, it's more like.
There's something of a complete innovation that is coming
from an idea that I'm confronted with. It's not
so much a thought, but it becomes a reality
with which I'm interacting, and that's typical of a
psychotic experience. You are starting to experience new realities,
and some of the figures and some of the
ideas that are circulating in our culture become real
creatures with which I am interacting.
Right, so, uh, how shoulder psychotic experiences be dealt
with, particularly in a clinical context to help people
overcome their distress?
Yeah. So we have to see that often in
a clinical context, people enter in a state of
crisis, huh, um, they don't know what to do
anymore, they cannot make sense anymore of these things
that are happening to them and often in their
context, people are also in panic, uh, like their,
their, their partner is in a panic because what
is happening to my, to, to, to my, to
my boyfriend, to to my, to my, to my
husband. Um, PEOPLE don't know, there is panic. So
the one thing that first of all needs to
be done in a mental healthcare system is to
create a context that can contain the crisis. That
incarnates something of the calmness like give people space
and time, let them land, let them arrive, let
them be welcome in a, in, in a context,
so provide them with time and space and with
human beings that are there around them. Human beings
that are willing to listen to them, that are
willing to take it seriously, that are willing to
recognize their experience, and that does not mean that
we have to say to people, oh, it is
true what you experience, so we don't have to
like give a judgment whether it is true or
not true. The thing is they experience it and
the question is, but why, what, what, what triggered
it? What brought them in such a state of
crisis, uh, and so it's providing such an atmosphere
that is very important and to, to help people
to, to, to go beyond something of that experience.
Um, SO it's by creating a certain atmosphere, and
for me the most important thing to do there
is to create, to try to create encounters with
people, huh, and encounters with people is like meeting
again, speaking again to one another, um, and also
doing things together, eating together, drinking coffee together, and
maybe doing activities together. Like going for a walk,
painting a little bit, playing some music, listening to
some music, discussing novels, uh, but also maybe discussing
their life situations, uh, and to kind of like
really valorize them as sense-making human beings. That's the
kind of context that we should create for people
and then we can think of. What can maybe
help people to enter such a state, uh, and
it's only at that point, for example, that medication
could be considered for people. I don't think it's
a standard solution that works for everybody or that
makes sense for everybody. For some people it might
help, and for some people it might help that
they have medication that makes them less anxious, huh.
Uh, AND other people, something that makes them an
antidepressant or an antipsychotic medication, but to be very
careful with that, it's not the the, the solution,
the medications, but it can help in reaching a
certain calmness inside, a certain openness again to, to
attend to the experience, because that's for me what
needs to be done and the next step is
like looking how to express something of it, huh,
and we can both do that in words. Huh,
like in talking therapy, like we usually do in
psychoanalysis, but we can also do that in creative
expression, and that's also what I stress in the
book, uh, psychotic experiences are so Different compared to
other human experiences that it's not everything about them
can be told just in plain words and in
narratives. Something is often better expressed in creative ways
like through painting and singing, um, uh, as, as
other modes of, of human expression are often very
useful, um, also in that context.
Right, yes, because nowadays we tend to have these
very biological, very strong biological framework in psychiatry specifically,
and many times people think that even the Professionals
themselves that the only way, or, or, or maybe
not the only way, but the, the primary way
of helping people who suffer from psychotic episodes is
through medication.
Right. Yeah, and, and, and that's a bit our
societal um delusion, you could say. We live in
a technological society, and we tend to believe that
if there is a problem, there must be something
of a, of a mechanical solution to it, like
my, my, my car is not driving very well.
I go to the garage and I ask people
like, check it, monitor it, and, and change the,
the little element in my car that is causing
the. Disturbance, we are mechanical thinkers and we tend
to think that psychiatrists and psychologists should be some
kind of engineers of the soul who do the
same thing with a human being that is in
crisis, as if they can look into the mind
and look into the brain and then change that
little mechanism and preferably we want something concrete, something
technical as a solution, but that's just a societal
dominant narrative, um. And of course there is something
of our human functioning that obeys that mechanical, biological
logic, but there's much to our functioning that is
different, that, that goes beyond that simple model, and
when we want to take care of people with
psychosis, we have to go for that broader perspective
and therefore, we need like a broader idea about
human functioning in which, Sense making, speaking, using words,
using narratives, uh, is also taken into account the
fact that we live in a cultural context, the
fact that um if we live in unhealthy circumstances,
this will have an effect on our, how we
feel, these are all things that need to be
taken into account and not just focusing on the
question of, OK, a medica giving, giving a medication
for, for it as the solution.
Right. So, uh, I mean, I want to ask
you this question and I actually have two more
questions also because we're running out of time here,
but, uh, people have this very common understanding of
what, uh, uh, so to speak, psychotic person, uh,
is like, where they think that it's not possible
at all to communicate with them. Because they are
out of their mind, they are insane or something
like that. I mean, but, but, but how can
people communicate with someone who suffers from or experiences
psychotic episodes?
Yeah, well, there are at least 3 things that
we can always do that everybody can always do
if you are a professional or if you're appear
to someone, if, if it's someone in your, of
your friends. There's 3 things that we can always
do, and the first of it is very easy
and very difficult, and this we can listen. And
listening means like with an openness of mind, attend
the other, and we could maybe if we would
write other here with a capital O in the
sense like someone in who they are and how
they are different. Compared to what we think they
are and that we accept it and really listening
to people means like being open to what that
very person is saying and often we don't listen
because we already have an opinion about people and
that's the difficulty also when we classify someone, oh,
but he's a psychiatric patient. Yeah, uh, then we
don't listen anymore because we already frame it, so
actual listening is like creating an openness of mind
in yourself and really attending to what someone is
saying, huh, and so it's in a non-judgmental way
attending to someone. That's the first thing we can
all do, simple, listen. The second thing you can
do is that we can recognize the impact of
the experience. Maybe it's not something that I myself
have experienced, like a voice saying um weird things
to me, huh? Maybe I didn't experience it myself,
but if someone tells me that this has happened
to them, I can recognize the impact of it.
Uh, IT'S not saying like, OK, but this is
not possible, hearing a voice that I don't hear
that it's not being judgmental here again, but it's
recognizing that it must be disturbing to feel that
or to hear that, huh? Personally I didn't experience
it, but if what you say you have experienced.
That must be like devastating, so recognizing something of
the impact of an experience is also something we
can always do. And the third thing we can
always do is that we can do things together
with people beyond. That psychotic experience, we can always
drink a coffee together, we can always chat a
little bit about, about, about cycling uh on TV
or, or, or, or a TV show or sports
uh or the weather or uh the quality of
the, the, the bread. That the bakery is selling,
so there's always little things we can talk about,
and this is also very important because um often
when people start to have psychotic experiences there starts
to be a distancing both in that people lose
their feeling of connectedness with the world, but also
that, that the world takes a distance from them.
And it's often by doing little things together that
we keep a connectedness, so we can always invite
someone to go for a walk, for example, or
to go for a coffee, uh, and that's creating
a connection, and these are three things we can
always, all of us do, both if you're caregivers
in an informal sense or professionals or friends to
people. This is something we can always do, and
that will help people to digest their psychotic experience.
Yeah, you know, I'm not a clinical professional, of
course, but I, I mean, in dealing with people
that many times other people label as crazy or
insane or out of their mind or something like
that, I mean, I frequent, frequently find that many
times it's if you just listen to the person,
it's If you try to put aside your, let's
say, cultural filters in terms of what you consider
normative and so on, it's not that hard to
understand why a person who manifests a particular mental
experience or distress or something, why, at least in
their particular case, in their particular circumstances, that makes
sense. And many times I think we're also too
weak when it comes, when it comes to uh
ostracizing or stigmatizing or alienating someone just because they
express particular ideas when perhaps uh I, I mean,
I'm not necessarily trying to minimizing here uh the
distress the distress caused by psycho. Experiences and other
kinds of mental experiences, but perhaps sometimes it's not
even that the person has any kind of mental
problem. It's that it's just that they're different in
their way of thinking and they are not heard
actually heard by other people. I mean, I don't
know if you also have that kind of experience
or not, but
Yeah, absolutely, and we, we must also see that
there's quite some very creative minds that we have
had or that we have in, in our culture
and society that um that started a way of
thinking or that, that way of thinking was connected
to something of psychosis and of insanity. Um, LIKE
in philosophy we have Wittgenstein, uh, we have N
Nietzsche. These are important philosophers who, who thought through
very difficult problems. We have important mathematicians, we have,
uh, like also in my domain, domain of psychology,
like in, in the book I discussed the case
of Carl Gustav Jung, who clearly also had psychotic
experiences but who tried to. To like transform these
experiences into something of an insight into the human
mind but also like uh in, in an attempt
to be creative, um, and to live accordingly to
the, to these experiences in, in, in, in, in,
yeah, in very creative inventive ways we have many
artists who have had psychotic experiences so I see
it also at, as, as a. Potential source of,
of innovation and creativity both in an individual life
where we must see that if someone goes through
a psychotic crisis, this is not the end of
their lives, no, it, it, it, it is the
potential of for them to find something else and
I don't know beforehand what it will be, but
obviously it's a breaking away of something of a,
of what used to be an internal. Consensus or
an internal equilibrium, but they're going away, they're moving
from it, and it might lead them to a
different path that is maybe better for them, but
also at societal level, people with this kind of
experiences, yeah, can bring new ideas. Uh, IN a
world where we tend to circle around in, in
always the same ideas, and so there is something
of that creative power connected to psychosis that, that
should be valued.
So my last question then, and it's related to
what I've just asked you, I mean, what do
you make of the idea of insanity, because we
tend to use this word, we tend to label
people as insane. As if, I mean, they're out
of their mind and we can't even speak to
them in a rational way at least anymore. I
mean, uh, are there actually insane people? Should such
a label be used?
Well, the thing is that um these labels like
crazy and insanity. Um, THESE are lay terms to
refer to certain situations and often we use them
to refer to situations in which the crisis becomes
so intense and big that we cannot understand it
anymore, huh, um, and here it's interesting to see
that many people who have psychotic experiences and who
enter a crisis also have an experience of insanity
because they, they have the impression that the world
has gone insane. That the world is crazy, that
very weird things are being done to them, or
they might fear that some instances are making them
crazy. So craziness and insanity is a reference to,
um, a potential mental state of functioning where I
lose control, huh? And when outsiders tend to stigmatize
people, huh, they also tend to use that word
like they're someone is crazy or someone is insane.
But actually that's only denominating that they themselves are
afraid that they themselves cannot make sense of, of
a person's functioning anymore, but rather than thinking of
it as a challenge that is inviting me to
search new ways of finding a connection with someone.
At a societal level, we tend to withdraw into
the stigmatization and to continue like just framing someone
as insane. So framing someone as insane or or
as crazy is not the solution at all because
it's, it confirms the, the stigmatization. It's, it's, it,
it's in the moving beyond, it's in the thinking
of it as not so crazy, that's why it's
also in the title of my book, Why Psychosis
is not So Crazy, because we think, we tend
to think of it as very crazy and very
strange, but the more. You listen and attend to
people, the more you will discover that it's not
coming out of the blue and that it's actually
saying something, something about themselves, but often something about
their context as well, about their societies as well.
So it's a source of truth to, to people,
and if we don't listen to it, that is
very stupid.
Yeah, so let's end on that note, Dr. Van
Hole, and the book is again Why Psychosis Is
Not So Crazy A Roadmap to Hope and Recovery
for Families and Caregivers. We'll be leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview. And
would you like to just tell people where they
can find you and your work on the internet?
Um, WELL, um, like the book is, um, worldwide
available. You can find it, you can ask it
to your local bookseller, that book, um, they, they
can, um, search it and, and, and give it
to you or sell it to you, I guess.
You can ask your libraries to order it or
you can find it online, that book, um, but,
um, I'm also an academic, so I'm a professor
at Ghent University. Uh, MANY of the papers I've
been writing, um, are also online available. If you
use my name as a search term and you
look for, uh, Stein von Hule on, on what
has he written on psychosis or on psychoanalysis, you
will find multiple links to, to my work.
Great. So, Doctor Van Hue, thank you so much
for taking the time to come on the show.
I really loved our conversation. Thank you so much.
Yeah,
thank you, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Ia Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.